# Meeting-1: 2022-02-18

## Disclaimers

Mark’s disclaimer video was played.

## Attendees

Small self-introduction of the attendees. Mix of academics and industry.

## Meetings frequency and timing

The timing of this meeting was not perfect.
Future meetings will be on a necessity basis, most discussions will happen in the mailing list.
If necessary, another day of week would be better.

## Tasks and priorities

Ronan proposed covert channels and speculation prevention as the first goals of the SIG. No other proposition was made.
A technical discussion ensued. A technical "summary" is written down jointly with these minutes and will be shared as a basis for discussions.

Key points of the discussions:
- necessity to define security domains in the microarchitecture. It has been stressed out that the domain boundaries do not align with current microarchitectural constructs (privileges, address space, ...): we should be able to deal with sandboxes.
- concerning speculation prevention, a first key problem to address is the granularity of the solution (speculation should be prevented per instruction, per privilege, per address space, ... ?)
- Ved pointed that since Spectre allows reading in a given address space, a lightweight access control to shared memory space is interesting as mitigation.
- Mark specified that our solution(s) should be adapted to the different profiles.


## People to embed in this group

Suggested names:

- Gernot Heiser
- Andy Glew
- People from Spectre and Meltdown at TU Graz

(Andy and Gernot are among the people at the origin of this group).


