Object: Meeting #2 - Minutes

Below is a formatted summary of the discussions from Meeting #2.

## Security domains

### Definition

The usual definition of a security domain is: `What is delimited by a unique security policy`.
In the `domes` and `fence.t` papers, they used security domains to decide when to flush and when to partition, at a *sandbox* granularity.
Basically, we cannot have really small security domains there since they are tied to heavy weight microarchitectural operations.

Allison proposes to consider finer grained security domains in order to apply different security policies at smaller granularities, without a big impact on the microarchitectural states: for example to disable speculation for a function only.

### Semantics

How we define the security domain semantics has a high impact on the usability of the extension, constraints imposed on hardware, and the security we can achieve.

- `secdom.switch` to delimit only boundaries. Cannot be used to taint microarchitectural structures when several security domains coexist in the system. Imply only one secdom, or need another mechanism for taint (can be the hartid).
- `secdom.switch rs1` to identify the next secdom identifier in `rs1`. Can be used to taint structures, since the identifier is arbitrary it allows for far more use cases. For example, to support simultaneous multithreading. But imply greater hardware complexity to deal with arbitrary secdoms combinations.
- Stack semantics: `secdom.push`, `secdom.pop` to imply that we may come back soon to the previous security domain (syscall, interrupt, driver, ...). A possible hardware implementation, even with only one hart, is to reserve some microarchitectural states for such cases. When dealing with the interrupt, we switch to the new secdom, with dedicated states, then come back to the previous secdom and continue our execution still in a hot state.
- Continuation semantics: `secdom.save rd`, `secdom.restore rs1` to have more liberty in how we sequence security domains, but with similar implications than the stack semantics.

### Security policies

We can associate security policies with security domains. The definition of these security policies is clearly one of the goals of this SIG.
Several features may be controlled by these policies:

- what microarchitectural structures can be shared, with whom ? For example, do we share uarch states across privilege levels ? Across security domains ?
- automaticity of the security features: do we prevent speculation in all cases, depending on specific instruction patterns, or only upon manually inserted security barriers ?
- trust in the execution state: do we believe that an attacker can control a register value ? If not, we can loosen our security requirements [as is currently done in the Linux kernel](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/admin-guide/hw-vuln/spectre.html).

### Security context

The security context is defined by all the elements that can be used to inform on the security requirements at some point in the execution.

To illustrate this definition, and its relation with security domains, let’s consider a system call where the user transfer the control flow to the kernel.
In this transition, there is a change of security context (transition from user mode to supervisor), while potentially keeping the security domain unchanged.
The security policy, tied to the security domain, may say that we must flush microarchitectural states for this transition. 
In the end, the whole syscall can be executed in the same security domain as the user, it does not imply that no security operations can be performed to prevent covert channels and speculation attacks.

Today, the security context is defined by the privilege level exclusively. But we have to give more information to the hardware to improve security while keeping some performances. In the future, the security context may be defined by, for example:

- the privilege level
- the security domain
- a memory page flag
- …

## Memory tagging

The hardware could use security annotations associated with memory address, such as a `confidential` bit in the memory pages flags. An example usage is to prevent speculatively loading confidential addresses.
But this should be discussed, and probably developed, by SIG or TG working on memory topics.